.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH FITYK 1 "September 3, 2004" 
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
fityk \- non-linear curve fitting and data analysis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fityk
.br
.B cfityk
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manpage documents briefly the 
.B fityk
and 
.B cfityk
programs, flexible and portable program for nonlinear fitting of analytical
functions (especially peak-shaped) to data (usually experimental data). In
other words, for nonlinear peak separation and analysis.
.br
It was developed for analyzing diffraction patterns, but can be also used in
other fields, since concepts and operations specific for crystallography are
separated from the rest of the program.
.br
Fityk offers various nonlinear fitting methods, subtracting background,
calibrating data, easy placement of peaks and changing peak parameters,
automation of common tasks with scripts, and much more. The main advantage
of the program is a flexibility - parameters of peaks can be arbitrarily
binded with each other, eg. width of peak can be an independent variable,
can be the same as width of other peak or can be given by complicated -
common for all peaks - formula.
.br
The program comes in two versions: 
.B fityk
, the GUI version and 
.B cfityk
, the command line version.
.br
A user manual for 
.B fityk
and
.B cfityk
can be found in /usr/share/doc/fityk/fitykhelp.html.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
This program requires no options.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Carlo Segre <segre@iit.edu>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
